README.md, before:

# jsonschematics

`jsonschematics` is a Go package designed to validate and manipulate JSON data structures using schematics.

## Features

- Validate JSON objects against defined schematics
- Convert schematics to JSON schemas
- Handle complex data validation scenarios
- Perform Operations on the Data

## Installation

To install the package, use the following command:

```sh
go get github.com/ashbeelghouri/jsonschematics
```

## Usage

### Validation

#### Validating JSON Data
You can validate JSON data against a defined schematic using the Validate function. Here's an example:

```golang
package main

import (
    "fmt"
    "github.com/ashbeelghouri/jsonschematics"
)

func main() {
    schema := jsonschematics.Schematics{
        // Define your schema here
    }

    data := map[string]interface{}{
        "Name": "John",
        "Age":  30,
    }

    err := schema.Validate(data)
    if err != nil {
        fmt.Println("Validation errors:", err)
    } else {
        fmt.Println("Validation successful")
    }
}
```

#### Loading Schematics From JSON file
Instead of defining the Schema directly, Load the schema from JSON file:

```golang
package main

import (
    "fmt"
    "github.com/ashbeelghouri/jsonschematics"
)

func main() {
	var schematics jsonschematics.Schematics
    err := jsonschematics.LoadSchemaFromFile("path-to-your-schema.json")
    if err != nil {
        fmt.Println("Unable to load the schema:", err)
    }else {
        fmt.Println("Schema Loaded Successfully")
    }
}
```
see the API Reference for json fields mapping.


#### Loading Schematics From map[string]interface{}
If you want to load the schema from map[string]interface, you can use the below example:

```golang
package main

import (
    "fmt"
    "github.com/ashbeelghouri/jsonschematics"
)

func main() {
	var schematics jsonschematics.Schematics
    schema := map[string]interface{}{
        ... define your schema
    }

    err := jsonschematics.LoadSchemaFromMap(&schema)
    if err != nil {
        fmt.Println("Unable to load the schema:", err)
    }else {
        fmt.Println("Schema Loaded Successfully")
    }
}
```

#### Adding Custom Validation Functions
You can also add your functions to validate the data:

##### Example 1
```golang
package main

import (
    "fmt"
    "github.com/ashbeelghouri/jsonschematics"
)

func main() {
	var schematics jsonschematics.Schematics
    err := schematics.LoadSchemaFromFile("path-to-your-schema.json")
    if err != nil {
        fmt.Println("Unable to load the schema:", err)
    }
	schematics.Validators.RegisterValidator("StringIsInsideArr", StringInArr)
}

func StringInArr(i interface{}, attr map[string]interface{}) error {
	str := i.(string)
	strArr := attr["arr"].([]string)
	found := false
	if len(strArr) > 0 {
		for _, item := range strArr {
			if item == str {
				found = true
			}
		}
	}
	if !found {
		return errors.New(fmt.Sprintf("string not found in array"))
	}
	return nil
}

```

##### Example 2
```golang
package main

import (
    "fmt"
    "github.com/ashbeelghouri/jsonschematics"
)

func main() {
	var schematics jsonschematics.Schematics
	err := schematics.LoadSchemaFromFile("path-to-your-schema.json")
    if err != nil {
        fmt.Println("Unable to load the schema:", err)
    }
	schematics.Validators.RegisterValidator("StringIsInsideArr", func(i interface{}, attr map[string]interface{}) error {
    	str := i.(string)
    	strArr := attr["arr"].([]string)
    	found := false
    	if len(strArr) > 0 {
    		for _, item := range strArr {
    			if item == str {
    				found = true
    			}
    		}
    	}
    	if !found {
    		return errors.New(fmt.Sprintf("string not found in array"))
    	}
    	return nil
    })
}

```

### Operations

#### Perform Operations on Object
```golang
package main

import (
    "fmt"
    "github.com/ashbeelghouri/jsonschematics"
)

func main() {
    schema := jsonschematics.Schematics{
        // Define your schema here
    }

    data := map[string]interface{}{
        "Name": "John",
        "Age":  30,
    }

    newData := schema.Operate(data)
    fmt.Printf("Data after Operations: %v", newData)
}
```

#### Adding Custom Operator Functions
You can also add your functions to operate on the data:
```golang
package main

import (
    "fmt"
    "github.com/ashbeelghouri/jsonschematics"
)

func main() {
	var schematics jsonschematics.Schematics
	err := schematics.LoadSchemaFromFile("path-to-your-schema.json")
    if err != nil {
        fmt.Println("Unable to load the schema:", err)
    }
	schematics.Operators.RegisterOperation("CapitalizeString", Capitalize)
}

func Capitalize(i interface{}, attributes map[string]interface{}) *interface{} {
	str := i.(string)
	var opResult interface{} = strings.ToUpper(string(str[0])) + strings.ToLower(str[1:])
	return &opResult
}
```

## API Reference

### Example JSON Files
- [Schema](https://github.com/ashbeelghouri/jsonschematics/blob/master/json/schema.json)
- [Data](https://github.com/ashbeelghouri/jsonschematics/blob/master/json/data.json)
  
```sh
For more examples, Please visit the json folder that is included in the repository and review the Test_Basic.go to see the usage
```

### Structs

#### Schematics
```golang
- Schema                                       		    Schema
- Validators                                   		    validators.Validators
- Operators				       		    operators.Operators
- Prefix                                       		    string
- Separator                                    		    string
- ArrayIdKey                                   		    string
- LoadSchemaFromFile(path string)                  	    error
- LoadSchemaFromMap(m *map[string]interface{})              error
- Validate(data interface{})        		            interface{}
- Operate(data interface{})	                            interface{}
```

##### Schema
```golang
- Version string `json:"version"`
- Fields []Field `json:"fields"`
```

###### >Explanation
```sh
* Version is for the maintenance of the schema
* Fields contains the validation logic for all the keys
```

##### Field
```golang
- DependsOn   []string 			`json:"depends_on"`
- TargetKey   string 			`json:"target_key"`
- Description string 			`json:"description"`
- Validators  []string 			`json:"validators"`
- Constants   map[string]interface{} 	`json:"constants"`
- Operators   []string            	`json:"operators"`
```

###### >Explanation
```sh
* DependsOn will check if the keys in array exists in data
* TargetKey will target the value in the data throught the key
* Description can have anything to explain the data, this can also be empty
* Validators is an array of string "validation functions"
* Constants will have dynanmic constants for each validator
```

##### Constant
```golang
- Attributes map[string]interface{} 	`json:"attributes"`
- ErrMsg     string 			`json:"err"`
```
###### >Explanation
```sh
* Attributes are passed in to the validation function so, it can have any map string interface.
* ErrMsg is a string that is shown as an error when validation fails
```

#### Errors
- ErrorMessages
- ErrorMessage

##### ErrorMessages
```golang
- Messages                                                 []ErrorMessage
- AddError(validator string, target string, err string)
- HaveErrors()                                             bool
```

##### ErrorMessage
```golang
- Message   string
- Validator string
- Target    string
- Value     string
- ID        string
```

###### >Explanation
```sh
* Validate Function will always return ErrorMessages
* Validator is the function that have validated the value
* Target is the key on which validation have been performed
* Value is the Target's value.
* ID is the target array key value to identify the validators inside the array, it is very important to define the arrayKeyID, so we can identify which row of an array have the validation issues.
```

#### Go Version
```golang
go 1.22.1
```

## Contributing
1. Fork the repository on GitHub.
2. Create a new branch for your feature or bug fix.
3. Write tests to cover your changes.
4. Update Documentation to include your features/changes.
5. Add yourself to contributers.
6. Send a pull request.

### Contributers
<a href="https://github.com/ashbeelghouri">
  <img src="https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/u/41609537?s=400&u=1b9ea072fc9a11acf32d86c5196a08f2696a458a&v=4" width="50px" height: "50px"/>
</a>

## License
This project is licensed under the MIT License. See the [LICENSE](https://github.com/ashbeelghouri/jsonschematics/blob/master/LICENSE) file for details.

Commit message:

updates on the error message

README.md, after:

# jsonschematics

`jsonschematics` is a Go package designed to validate and manipulate JSON data structures using schematics.

## Features

- Validate JSON objects against defined schematics
- Convert schematics to JSON schemas
- Handle complex data validation scenarios
- Perform Operations on the Data

## Installation

To install the package, use the following command:

```sh
go get github.com/ashbeelghouri/jsonschematics
```

## Usage

### Validation

#### Validating JSON Data
You can validate JSON data against a defined schematic using the Validate function. Here's an example:

```golang
package main

import (
    "fmt"
    "github.com/ashbeelghouri/jsonschematics"
)

func main() {
    schema := jsonschematics.Schematics{
        // Define your schema here
    }

    data := map[string]interface{}{
        "Name": "John",
        "Age":  30,
    }

    err := schema.Validate(data)
    if err != nil {
        fmt.Println("Validation errors:", err)
    } else {
        fmt.Println("Validation successful")
    }
}
```

#### Loading Schematics From JSON file
Instead of defining the Schema directly, Load the schema from JSON file:

```golang
package main

import (
    "fmt"
    "github.com/ashbeelghouri/jsonschematics"
)

func main() {
	var schematics jsonschematics.Schematics
    err := jsonschematics.LoadSchemaFromFile("path-to-your-schema.json")
    if err != nil {
        fmt.Println("Unable to load the schema:", err)
    }else {
        fmt.Println("Schema Loaded Successfully")
    }
}
```
see the API Reference for json fields mapping.


#### Loading Schematics From map[string]interface{}
If you want to load the schema from map[string]interface, you can use the below example:

```golang
package main

import (
    "fmt"
    "github.com/ashbeelghouri/jsonschematics"
)

func main() {
	var schematics jsonschematics.Schematics
    schema := map[string]interface{}{
        ... define your schema
    }

    err := jsonschematics.LoadSchemaFromMap(&schema)
    if err != nil {
        fmt.Println("Unable to load the schema:", err)
    }else {
        fmt.Println("Schema Loaded Successfully")
    }
}
```

#### Adding Custom Validation Functions
You can also add your functions to validate the data:

##### Example 1
```golang
package main

import (
    "fmt"
    "github.com/ashbeelghouri/jsonschematics"
)

func main() {
	var schematics jsonschematics.Schematics
    err := schematics.LoadSchemaFromFile("path-to-your-schema.json")
    if err != nil {
        fmt.Println("Unable to load the schema:", err)
    }
	schematics.Validators.RegisterValidator("StringIsInsideArr", StringInArr)
}

func StringInArr(i interface{}, attr map[string]interface{}) error {
	str := i.(string)
	strArr := attr["arr"].([]string)
	found := false
	if len(strArr) > 0 {
		for _, item := range strArr {
			if item == str {
				found = true
			}
		}
	}
	if !found {
		return errors.New(fmt.Sprintf("string not found in array"))
	}
	return nil
}

```

##### Example 2
```golang
package main

import (
    "fmt"
    "github.com/ashbeelghouri/jsonschematics"
)

func main() {
	var schematics jsonschematics.Schematics
	err := schematics.LoadSchemaFromFile("path-to-your-schema.json")
    if err != nil {
        fmt.Println("Unable to load the schema:", err)
    }
	schematics.Validators.RegisterValidator("StringIsInsideArr", func(i interface{}, attr map[string]interface{}) error {
    	str := i.(string)
    	strArr := attr["arr"].([]string)
    	found := false
    	if len(strArr) > 0 {
    		for _, item := range strArr {
    			if item == str {
    				found = true
    			}
    		}
    	}
    	if !found {
    		return errors.New(fmt.Sprintf("string not found in array"))
    	}
    	return nil
    })
}

```

### Operations

#### Perform Operations on Object
```golang
package main

import (
    "fmt"
    "github.com/ashbeelghouri/jsonschematics"
)

func main() {
    schema := jsonschematics.Schematics{
        // Define your schema here
    }

    data := map[string]interface{}{
        "Name": "John",
        "Age":  30,
    }

    newData := schema.Operate(data)
    fmt.Printf("Data after Operations: %v", newData)
}
```

#### Adding Custom Operator Functions
You can also add your functions to operate on the data:
```golang
package main

import (
    "fmt"
    "github.com/ashbeelghouri/jsonschematics"
)

func main() {
	var schematics jsonschematics.Schematics
	err := schematics.LoadSchemaFromFile("path-to-your-schema.json")
    if err != nil {
        fmt.Println("Unable to load the schema:", err)
    }
	schematics.Operators.RegisterOperation("CapitalizeString", Capitalize)
}

func Capitalize(i interface{}, attributes map[string]interface{}) *interface{} {
	str := i.(string)
	var opResult interface{} = strings.ToUpper(string(str[0])) + strings.ToLower(str[1:])
	return &opResult
}
```

## API Reference

### Example JSON Files
- [Schema](https://github.com/ashbeelghouri/jsonschematics/blob/master/json/schema.json)
- [Data](https://github.com/ashbeelghouri/jsonschematics/blob/master/json/data.json)
  
```sh
For more examples, Please visit the json folder that is included in the repository and review the Test_Basic.go to see the usage
```

### Structs

#### Schematics
```golang
- Schema                                       		    Schema
- Validators                                   		    validators.Validators
- Operators				       		                    operators.Operators
- Prefix                                       		    string
- Separator                                    		    string
- ArrayIdKey                                   		    string
- LoadSchemaFromFile(path string)                  	    error
- LoadSchemaFromMap(m *map[string]interface{})          error
- Validate(data interface{})        		            *ErrorMessages
- Operate(data interface{})	                            interface{}
```

##### Schema
```golang
- Version string `json:"version"`
- Fields []Field `json:"fields"`
```

###### >Explanation
```sh
* Version is for the maintenance of the schema
* Fields contains the validation logic for all the keys
```

##### Field
```golang
- DependsOn   []string 			    `json:"depends_on"`
- TargetKey   string 			    `json:"target_key"`
- Description string 			    `json:"description"`
- Validators  map[string]Constant 	`json:"validators"`
- Operators   map[string]Constant   `json:"operators"`
```

###### >Explanation
```sh
* DependsOn will check if the keys in array exists in data
* TargetKey will target the value in the data throught the key
* Description can have anything to explain the data, this can also be empty
* Validators is an array map of validators where name is the function name and values contains attributes which is passed along to the function with value.
* Operators is an array map of Operators where name is the function name and values contains attributes which is passed along to the function with value.
```

##### Constant
```golang
- Attributes map[string]interface{} 	`json:"attributes"`
- ErrMsg     string 			`json:"err"`
```
###### >Explanation
```sh
* Attributes are passed in to the validation function so, it can have any map string interface.
* ErrMsg is a string that is shown as an error when validation fails
```

#### Errors
- ErrorMessages
- ErrorMessage

##### ErrorMessages
```golang
- Messages                                                 []ErrorMessage
- AddError(validator string, target string, err string)
- HaveErrors()                                             bool
- HaveSingleError(format string)                           error
```

##### ErrorMessage
```golang
- Message   string
- Validator string
- Target    string
- Value     string
- ID        string
```

If you want to get the single Error, you can define the error format like below:
"validation error %message for %target on validating with %validator, provided: %value"
- %validator: this is the name of the validator
- %message: this is the main error message
- %target: this is the target key of the error message
- %value: this is the value on which validation has been performed.

###### >Explanation
```sh
* Validate Function will always return ErrorMessages
* Validator is the function that have validated the value
* Target is the key on which validation have been performed
* Value is the Target's value.
* ID is the target array key value to identify the validators inside the array, it is very important to define the arrayKeyID, so we can identify which row of an array have the validation issues.
```

#### Go Version
```golang
go 1.22.1
```

## Contributing
1. Fork the repository on GitHub.
2. Create a new branch for your feature or bug fix.
3. Write tests to cover your changes.
4. Update Documentation to include your features/changes.
5. Add yourself to contributers.
6. Send a pull request.

### Contributers
<a href="https://github.com/ashbeelghouri">
  <img src="https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/u/41609537?s=400&u=1b9ea072fc9a11acf32d86c5196a08f2696a458a&v=4" width="50px" height: "50px"/>
</a>

## License
This project is licensed under the MIT License. See the [LICENSE](https://github.com/ashbeelghouri/jsonschematics/blob/master/LICENSE) file for details.
